GWEN IFILL: Good
evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: Donald Trump defends
his record on women, as Hillary
Clinton wades into the fray.
Surveying the week ahead in
politics.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Then: protests
and a state of emergency again
in Saint Louis and Ferguson,
Missouri.
GWEN IFILL: A pious nation
resists family planning efforts
to address poverty, political
pushback to providing free
contraceptives in the
Philippines.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, a doctor
recounts his struggle for
survival after contracting
Ebola.
to get Ebola, we're all going to
die. In West Africa, the fear
presented itself as
denial that Ebola was even real.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: This was a day
of bombings and bloodshed in
three major countries across
the Muslim world. In Iraq,
Islamic State suicide bombers
killed nearly 60 people and
wounded more 100 others. The
attackers struck after nightfall
in Diyala province, just over
30 miles northeast of Baghdad.
GWEN IFILL: And in Afghanistan,
Taliban suicide bombers struck
again, killing at least
five people and wounding 16
outside Kabul's international
airport. The blast at a busy
roundabout followed Friday's
attacks that killed nearly 50.
And the Afghan president
demanded a crackdown today on
Taliban elements based in
neighboring
Pakistan.
ASHRAF GHANI, President of
Afghanistan (through
translator): If Pakistan
doesn't have the
capacity to bring them to the
table, they have this capacity
to stop their activities,
to close their offices, to bring
the insurgents to justice, and
to not allow their wounded
to be treated in the hospital.
GWEN IFILL: President Ghani
also spoke by phone with
Secretary of State John Kerry to
express his concern.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S.
Consulate in Istanbul, Turkey,
came under fire today as attacks
rocked
that country. Investigators
said two women belonging to a
far-left radical group shot
at the consulate. Witnesses
said police wounded one of the
attackers after she refused
to surrender.
MAN (through translator): It
was about 6:30 in the morning.
We heard the sound of gunfire.
The woman and the police officer
started clashing. I guess the
woman was an amateur
because she had dropped her
ammunition clip. She was
throwing what looked like
stones.
The officer shouted at her once
or two times, "Lay down, lay
down."
JUDY WOODRUFF: No one else was
hurt there, but three militants
and two policemen died
in a car bombing and gun battle
at a police station in Istanbul.
Elsewhere, a roadside
bomb killed four Turkish police
officers. It all came amid a
government crackdown
on Islamic State, Kurdish
elements and far-left militants.
GWEN IFILL: Migrants fleeing
conflict in Syria and
Afghanistan arrived by the
hundreds
in Greece this weekend. Coast
Guard vessels rescued more than
1,400 people in dozens of
operations. Meanwhile, a
policeman on Kos Island pulled a
knife and struck migrants
as tempers flared in a crowd
waiting for immigration papers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, the governor of
Colorado declared a disaster
today
after a major toxic spill, this
as word came that the disaster
is far worse than it first
appeared.
The Environmental Protection
Agency has now confirmed the
spill totals three million
gallons,
three times larger than
initially estimated. The mix of
heavy metals, including arsenic
and lead, has transformed the
Animas River into
mustard-colored soup.
MAN: It's definitely not how
the river is supposed to look.
It's already hard enough
to catch fish in the Animas, and
you know this stuff, it's
definitely not good for them,
going to kill a lot
of these fish off.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It started
Wednesday, when an EPA team
accidentally released
contaminated
water from the abandoned Gold
King Mine north of Silverton,
Colorado. It spewed into the
Animas and headed downstream.
The tainted torrent has now
traveled south more than 100
miles, flowing into New Mexico,
where the Animas meets the San
Juan River.
New Mexico's governor, Susana
Martinez, yesterday got an
aerial view of the contamination
in
Farmington.
GOV. SUSANA MARTINEZ (R), New
Mexico: You can't even describe
it. It's like when I
flew over the fires. And you
see something that your mind
isn't ready or adjusted to
see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The EPA says it
doesn't expect a major effect on
wildlife. And because
utilities closed their intake
valves, there's no sign that
drinking water has been
contaminated.
Still, homeowners like
Rosemary Hart are frustrated.
ROSEMARY HART, Homeowner: I'm
here on my property, and I
cannot shower. I cannot
cook. I cannot do anything with
the water from my water well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Adding to the
frustration, it took the EPA a
full day to notify communities
of the spill. Now the yellow
flow is heading west toward Lake
Powell in Utah, a popular
tourist destination, and EPA
officials have yet to indicate
how long cleanup will take.
the spill.
GWEN IFILL: Billionaire
investor Warren Buffett
announced his company's biggest
deal
ever today. Berkshire Hathaway
will buy Precision Castparts, an
aerospace and industrial
company, for $37 billion.
That news, plus a rise in oil
prices, sent Wall Street
surging. The Dow Jones
industrial
average gained more than 240
points to close above 17600.
The Nasdaq rose 58 points,
and the S&P 500 added 26.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Google will
become part of a new holding
company known as Alphabet.
The search giant unveiled the
change in operating structure
after the markets closed.
The switch will take place later
this year, and Google's stock
will automatically be converted
to Alphabet stock.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the week ahead in politics with
Tamara Keith and Susan
Page; protests and a state of
emergency called again in
Ferguson, plus much more.
GWEN IFILL: Donald Trump
continues to consume the
post-debate debate, Hillary
Clinton lashes
out at the Republicans, and
Bernie Sanders draws huge West
Coast crowds.
You may have heard Trump sparked
an uproar when he described FOX
News moderator Megyn
Kelly as having "blood coming
out of her eyes, blood coming
out of her wherever." She was
-- he said, "In my opinion,
she was off-base."
The next day, he said he meant
blood coming out of her nose.
Today, Hillary Clinton,
campaigning in New Hampshire,
said Trump was outrageous, but
that Republicans who oppose all
abortions are just as bad.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: While
what Donald Trump said about
Megyn
Kelly is outrageous, what the
rest of the Republicans are
saying about all women is
also outrageous. They brag
about slashing women's health
care funding. They say they
would force women who have been
raped to carry their rapist's
child.
GWEN IFILL: Sounds like a
perfect time for a Politics
Monday.
We're joined from New Hampshire
tonight by Tamara Keith of NPR,
and here in the studio
by Susan Page of USA Today.
Tamara, you were in New
Hampshire with Hillary covering
Hillary Clinton today. Tell us
a little bit about this whole
idea, this broad idea of women's
issues. So far, we're talking
about the slur was that Donald
Trump did or didn't intend.
We're talking about abortion,
but women's issues, it seems to
me, especially when it comes to
an unknown candidate like
Donald Trump, is much
broader than that.
TAMARA KEITH, National
Public Radio: Certainly.
And Donald Trump, over the
weekend, said that he's huge on
women's issues. It's not
entirely
clear what that means. Trump,
before he was pro-life, was
pro-choice. And, of course,
that's one of many issues where
there are lots of substantive
questions that could be
asked of a candidate, but,
typically, he spends a lot of
time feuding instead.
GWEN IFILL: Has the Clinton
campaign decided this is an
opportunity for them?
TAMARA KEITH: Oh, absolutely.
Hillary Clinton was having a lot
of fun in that media
availability today, though --
and you also got the sense that
she would have been perfectly
happy if someone, anyone, had
asked her a detailed policy
question about her college
affordability plan, which
is what she was there for.
But, clearly, Clinton is using
this to go after the Republican
field as a whole, to
tie them to Donald Trump, and
also, in particular, today, she
was talking about Marco Rubio.
That's the Florida senator who
many say performed quite well in
that debate last week,
and she was talking about his
position on abortion to not
include incest or rape, and
making the argument that that
was the more extreme position
than any of the entertaining
things that Donald Trump said.
And she described him as an
entertainer.
GWEN IFILL: OK, Susan, let's
talk about Donald Trump. It's
-- we have to. He's
still leading the polls. He
doesn't appeared to have been
hurt at all by whatever happened
in that debate or people's
interpretations of it.
But when we talk about Donald
Trump and we talk about where he
stands on issues, we know
about the things he says. What
does he believe, especially when
it comes to these issues?
who has ever served in public
office, so there's no voting
record that we can go look at,
as
we can with people who served
as governors and senators.
And, in fact, if you go on
DonaldJTrump.com, his Web site,
as I did just before we came
on board, there are ways to buy
T-shirts with Trump's name,
there are a lot of news stories
posted about how well he's doing
in the polls, you can contribute
to his campaign, but there
is not even a tab that takes you
to his policy positions on
issues.
There's nothing on his Web site
up to this point that explains
where he stands on issues
like education, or health care,
or jobs or terrorism. These are
all issues that of
course women care
about, as do men.
GWEN IFILL: Well, that's the
thing. We're talking about --
when we say women's issues,
we're also talking about health
care and education and college
affordability.
But we have heard nothing
from him on any of that.
SUSAN PAGE: And you know what?
I think, for his core
supporters, it doesn't matter.
They're endorsing kind of an
attitude that has served him
well so far.
But if he wants to grow his
support, if he wants to become
somebody who is actually taken
seriously as a potential
nominee, he's going to have to
take positions on some of these
big issues.
GWEN IFILL: Tamara, we saw how
Hillary Clinton has been
responding to this. How about
the
others, especially all the
Republican candidates? How have
they been responding? They have
obviously been trying to fight
to get themselves heard in all
of this.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, any number
of candidates have said things
like, well, don't you just
want to ask me about what I want
to do, John Kasich being one of
them. Senator Lindsey
Graham of South Carolina came
out with another strongly-worded
statement saying, come on,
let's just ditch this guy,
basically, more or less.
And I think what's going on
here, what's interesting though
is that Donald Trump keeps going
from
feud to feud to feud. He said
mean things about Megyn Kelly.
Then he moved on and
said mean things about Carly
Fiorina, one of the other
presidential candidates, and
he keeps doing that, keeps
sparking these feuds. It's kind
of like rap feuds of the
'90s, where they're feuding and
actually the feud gives
everybody more publicity. So
some candidates are embracing
the fight with Trump.
GWEN IFILL: It's true. I have
been following this feud between
Meek Mill and Drake over
the last week. I have no idea
what it's about, but I know it's
a beef.
OK. So, we have the same thing
happening here. But here's what
I'm curious about,
Susan. There's power in this,
isn't there? He was mad at FOX
News, but now it appears
he's going to appear on FOX News
because he made up with Roger
Ailes.
SUSAN PAGE: So, here's the
amazing thing. Not only does he
lead in the polls, but
Donald Trump is defining
the entire conversation.
So the other nominees, the other
candidates either try to get
into the story, like Rand
Paul criticizing him as not
really a real conservative or
Bobby Jindal saying that he's
going to just say Trump's name
randomly through his speeches in
an effort to get attention,
or they're trying to figure out
how to talk about something
else.
That's what you see with Marco
Rubio and John Kasich, where
they are really desperate to
try to break through on the
issues that they want to talk
about and avoid having to
respond
every day in every way to
outrageous comments by Donald
Trump. And I don't think that
they have quite figured out how
to do that at the moment,
because Donald Trump is still,
as he likes to be,
right at center stage.
GWEN IFILL: OK, Tamara, let's
talk about Bernie Sanders. He
was on a West Coast swing
this week and he attracted tens
of thousands of people to his
rallies in Seattle, in Portland,
Oregon. And he's on his
way to Los Angeles today.
Is this something -- first of
all, what is the appeal for
Bernie Sanders? Why is he
getting these massive crowds at
this time, in August, for
heaven's sakes? And what
are the Hillary Clinton
people thinking about this?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, and, also,
he was endorsed today by the
nurses union. That's what he
was doing in L.A., was picking
up this big national
endorsement.
So Bernie Sanders has captured
something. He's really captured
a desire among many
people to fix income inequality.
He's talking about college
affordability. He has been
talking about that for months.
He really, in stark terms,
spells out the feeling that
a lot of people have that it's
just harder to get ahead, and
that's what he's capturing,
and people are showing
up to see him.
Now, I can't tell you what
portion of the people in those
arenas are just there to say,
hey, who is this guy and how
many of them would go out and,
say, caucus for him in Iowa
or volunteer for his campaign.
It's not clear to me what the
share is in those people
that are showing up.
GWEN IFILL: That's the same
question that could be asked
about Donald Trump at this
stage.
But what I'm curious about,
Susan, also is whether the
Hillary Clinton people are
worried
about it. She was asked about
it today and she just said, oh,
he's a nice colleague.
She didn't have anything
negative to say about him.
SUSAN PAGE: There is no
percentage for Hillary Clinton
to attack Bernie Sanders.
There's every -- because
everything she wants to do is to
get Bernie Sanders supporters
to support her either now or
later. She's really focused her
fire on the people she
thinks will be her potential
opponents, Jeb Bush and today
Marco Rubio.
But, certainly, Bernie Sanders
is underscoring some of the
vulnerabilities that Hillary
Clinton
has. I don't think the Hillary
Clinton thinks he's going to
take the nomination, but when
he gets 28,000 people to come to
a rally in Portland, Oregon, it
underscored -- could
she get 20,000 people to come
there with no organization, with
no money for ads, with
no infrastructure?
So I think he's concerning in
that way, not so much that he
takes the nomination, but
he shows the kind of energy
that she has yet to show.
GWEN IFILL: You begin to wonder
if, at this stage of the
campaign, what we're really
watching
for is the cumulative effect of
either the negative or e-mail
questions which don't go
away, of the outrage from Trump
or even just the crowds building
on themselves for Bernie
Sanders. Maybe
that's where we are.
SUSAN PAGE: And, of course,
we're pretty far away from the
election.
GWEN IFILL: No, we are?
SUSAN PAGE: Yes, we are. We
are going to be talking about
this for a long time.
is going to be, who has got
strengths and weaknesses and how
they might play out. But,
a year from now, we will still
be talking about some of these
same characters.
GWEN IFILL: And a year from
now, Tamara Keith will probably
still be in New Hampshire,
but maybe we will see you
here this next week.
TAMARA KEITH: Maybe.
GWEN IFILL: Tamara Keith of
NPR, Susan Page with USA Today,
thank you both.
SUSAN PAGE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Authorities in
Saint Louis County, Missouri,
imposed a new state of emergency
today after police critically
wounded an 18-year-old black man
overnight.
It happened at the end of
protests in the town of Ferguson
marking the death of Michael
Brown one year ago. Police said
a late-night demonstration got
rowdy, and Tyrone Harris
Jr. and others opened fire on
them. They said officers shot
back, wounding Harris.
convention today in Pittsburgh.
LORETTA LYNCH, U.S. Attorney
General: I strongly condemn the
violence that was perpetrated
against the community, including
the police officers, in Ferguson
last evening. Not
only does violence obscure any
message of peaceful protest. It
places the community
as well as the officers who are
seeking to protect it in harm's
way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There were new
protests around Ferguson and
Saint Louis today. Some 100
people rallied at the county
courthouse. Nearly 60 were
arrested.
I spoke a short time ago with
reporter Yamiche Alcindor, who's
covering the story for USA
Today.
Yamiche, welcome.
What is the situation right now?
YAMICHE ALCINDOR, USA Today:
Well, moments ago, several
protesters were arrested outside
a federal courthouse building.
And some of them are really
people that are really prominent
protesters, along with Cornel
West. So, right now, they're
being processed at that federal
courthouse and they're actually
facing federal charges. But
it's going to be really a $125
fine. They wouldn't really
say whether or not it's a
misdemeanor or a felony, but of
course it's a $125 fine.
So, it's not -- it's still a
summons. It's not going to be
anything too serious, but
this is still part of the Moral
Monday that people had here
today, where it was really
a series of civil disobediences
that they wanted to have in
coordination and really
in memory of Michael Brown.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, this was
planned before any of this
violence last night? Is that
right?
YAMICHE ALCINDOR: Yes, before
any of the violence that
happened last night, before
any of the looting, before the
second police-involved shooting.
There are people that had
already planned to have acts of
civil disobedience. They
were thinking about the idea
that, after Michael Brown's,
several people, hundreds of
people
took to the streets protesting
and demonstrating, mostly
peacefully. But also of course
we
remember that burned QuikTrip
that really put this whole story
on the nation's spotlight.
Louis, there were several actual
acts of disobedience, but the
one that I attended today was at
the
federal courthouse where several
members of the clergy got
together and were purposefully
arrested.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now we know
there is a state of emergency
that has been declared
in the area as a
result of last night.
But take us back to yesterday.
This was supposed to be a day --
in fact, it was a
day of peaceful protest in
memory of Michael Brown. But
then what happened last night?
night in Ferguson
when things get bad.
Usually, what happens in
Ferguson, if there is going to
be violence, because I should
say that there usually isn't
violence in Ferguson -- I have
been here several months -- but
when there is violence, what
happens is that you get to a
point in the night where you
think, OK, it's time to -- I can
go home, the crowd is kind of
dispersing.
And then, out of nowhere, that's
what happened last night. There
was a line of police officers,
protesters yelling at them, and
then after a while, it kind of
just lulled and people
were kind of wandering around.
I myself was thinking about
getting into my car. And
then we just heard a barrage of
gunshots. It was really the
most terrifying moments
of my journalistic career.
I ducked and was trying to run
behind cars. Dozens of police
officers were also cowering
behind their cars. You know the
situation is really important
and really dangerous when
the police are also running and
taking fire. And we later
learned that a young man was
shot, and that it was a
police-involved shooting. The
police say there was one --
there was
at first a group of two people
shooting and then one of the
people that were shooting
ran away.
They're calling him a suspect.
And that man ran away. And when
police spotted him,
he started again firing at the
police. That's what police say.
And then they also returned
fire and this young
man was shot.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So there clearly
seem to be two sides to the
story. The young man's
father is saying that he was
unarmed. The police are saying
they believed he shot at
them. So, that remains
to be squared away.
Yamiche, I want to read you
something that one of the Saint
Louis aldermen, Antonio French,
who has been very active in the
protest movement, he told a
reporter, he said, there is an
active
protest group, and then he said
there are some people who are
just waiting for stuff
to happen, just sitting back and
waiting for an opportunity to,
in his words, steal stuff
and cause trouble.
Is that what you're seeing?
YAMICHE ALCINDOR: That's
what I'm observing too.
I must say that the protesters,
the frequent protesters that I
have see them, they're
well-known
faces. They know the police
officers. I have been covering
this story for more than
a year. So, these protesters,
not only do they know each other
and not only do they
how to act peaceably, not only
do they how to de-escalate
situations, but they also know
police officers. And they
trust some of these officers.
And they will walk up to them
and say, hey, things are getting
out of hand, or I saw an
officer mace somebody, we really
didn't think that that was
appropriate.
So, really, Ferguson has come a
long way since last year.
Protesters are really now in
some ways, dare I say,
friendships with officers. So I
think that that's a different --
completely
different relationship than
those people -- I don't know if
you would call agitators -- but
there are people that are really
there not in any way connected
to the memory of Michael
Brown, not any way connected to
the issues that the protesters
are talking about, but
really they're just
there to cause trouble.
And these are the people that
the protesters don't want to be
associated with. And,
yesterday,
last night, I thought it was
really an important moment when
Chief Jon Belmar really said
during
his press conference that these
are not protesters, these are
criminals.
And that's a really big deal for
the protesters that come out
here every night and are
peaceful
for hundreds of days, when you
have the police also
differentiating that person.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jon Belmar, of
course, being the Saint Louis
police chief.
Just quickly, Yamiche, based on
what you know, what do you
expect to happen now?
YAMICHE ALCINDOR: I really want
to say that I expect that people
will try to remain as
peaceful as possible, that
people will really try to see --
when they see things escalating,
try to alert the police. But
that's what they did last night.
So, I'm really kind of cautious
to say what's going to happen
tonight because I want to
say that things are going to go
calmly. But I know that there
is still -- even with the
peaceful protesters, they don't
want to be told when to go home.
They're really into
protesting. They're really into
observing their First Amendment
rights.
And that's really important to
them, so people are really going
to be out there tonight.
They are going to be out there
late. I imagine they will have a
really long night tonight
and to stay out probably past
5:00 in the morning, because
that's what people do in
Ferguson, because even when
they're protesting peacefully,
they don't go to sleep early at
all. They stay out
very, very late.
So I'm really worried though
about when the sun sets and
these people that don't want
to be protesters, that don't
want to be peaceful, but these
people that really want to break
into businesses, whether or not
they are going to be back
tonight. I have a scary feeling
that they might be back tonight.
And I think that all journalists
and all people that are
there are really just trying to
be as cautious as we can be to
really prepare ourselves for
tonight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
Yamiche Alcindor, reporter for
USA Today, we certainly hope
nothing happens, but we know, as
you said, you will be there if
it is. Thank you.
YAMICHE ALCINDOR: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": an
American doctor tells the story
of his efforts to halt the
spread of Ebola and his own
fight against the deadly virus;
and how parents who are
not religious can teach their
children about God and faith.
But first, the rollout of a
controversial reproductive
health law in the Philippines
long resisted by the
Catholic Church there.
Special correspondent Fred de
Sam Lazaro reports from Manila.
A version of this story aired on
PBS' "Religion & Ethics
Newsweekly."
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
It's known as the baby
factory. But unlike most
factories, the people who run
Manila's biggest public hospital
wish this one were
less productive.
The staff here at the maternity
ward say this is a fairly
typical, if not slightly quieter
than usual day. Still, there
are 165 new mothers squeezed
into 127 beds. About 70
babies are delivered every day.
Their mothers are treated free
of charge. They couldn't
afford much anyway, with
household incomes of $5 a day,
often less.
Most, like Irene Ocampo, who's
19, will tell you their
pregnancy was unplanned.
IRENE OCAMPO, Mother (through
translator): I didn't know
anything about family planning
before becoming pregnant.
That's why I had my baby. I
would have preferred to start
having children at
20-plus, maybe 25.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The
hospital recently added a new
service that could help her
better
control when or even whether
to have more children.
IRENE OCAMPO (through
translator): I want to have
three to five years between
them.
in congress and court. It
requires public health
facilities to offer free
contraceptive
services. These have long been
legally available in private
clinics, which poor patients
like
these women could never afford.
DR. SYLVIA DE LA PAZ,
Philippines: We want all
pregnancies should be wanted and
should
end in a healthy
baby and mother.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
Obstetrician Sylvia De La Paz
has worked in these wards for 22
years. In that time, she says,
most patients have seen their
living conditions go from
poor to poorer.
DR. SYLVIA DE LA PAZ: Before,
there used to be street
children. Now you see street
families. They sleep in the
streets. They have no homes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Most
disturbing, she says, has been a
spike in teen pregnancies:
up 50 percent in the country in
the last decade, more than
double in this hospital.
Why do you think that is?
DR. SYLVIA DE LA PAZ: I think
it's also exposure to early
sexual encounters. The
age is now, I think, 12 to 14,
where, before, it used to 16 to
18. It's slid down now.
ANGEL, Philippines (through
translator): I had no idea that
young people like me could
have family planning.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Angel came
to this clinic run by a
nonprofit group to be fitted
with
a contraceptive implant. Like
most teenagers who come here,
she only learned of this service
after becoming pregnant at 14.
ANGEL (through translator): I
wanted to finish my studies to
become a teacher. Becoming
pregnant broke my dreams.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Some
proponents of the new
reproductive health law say an
entire
nation's dream has been broken
by its failure to control
population growth.
For instance, the Philippines
and neighboring Thailand once
has similar poverty levels,
but Thailand cut its population
growth rate substantially in
recent decades, the result,
Thais are far better off
economically, says Dr. Esparanza
Cabral, a former Philippine
health minister and one of the
architects of the new law.
DR. ESPARANZA CABRAL, Former
Health Minister: We know that
there is a big correlation
between number of children and
poverty incidents. So the less
number of children you have,
the lesser are your chances that
your family is poor. So that is
one aspect. And we
can see this not just a family
basis, but on a countrywide
basis.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Father Joel
Jason is a spokesman for the
Catholic Archdiocese of
Manila. He argues people are an
economic asset. He says they
have been poorly served
by their government.
REV. JOEL JASON, Archdiocese of
Manila: Give people job
opportunities, give children
education,
and then you bring them out of
poverty. Just giving them
condoms and contraceptives will
not automatically draw
them out of poverty.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The church
has long been a huge influence
in this predominantly
Catholic nation, its moral
teachings imprinted not just in
liturgy, but also in law.
The Philippine constitution,
updated in 1987, says that the
state shall equally protect
the mother and the unborn from
conception, and that's the basis
of opposition to the
reproductive health law.
Opponents argue that just about
all methods of artificial
contraception can
lead to abortion.
Despite church opposition, the
court upheld most of the new
law, directing the country's
food and drug administration to
approve non-abortion-causing
contraceptives. But the fight
hasn't ended.
Some opponents plans to go back
to court. They argue the
methods now approved, like
injectables or implants, pills
and IUDs, make the uterus
hostile to implantation, that
is,
they prevent an embryo, which is
legally protected, from
attaching to the womb.
Maria Noche is an attorney with
the group Alliance for the
Family.
MARIA CONCEPCION NOCHE, Alliance
for the Family: All the
contraceptives that have been
registered
right now, per our studies,
are all abortifacient.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: That is,
using them can lead to abortion.
Father Jason draws a distinction
between contraception and family
planning, for which the church
has no problem, he says.
REV. JOEL JASON: You will not
find any single document,
present or in the past, that the
church says women should have as
many children as they can
possibly bear.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: In fact,
Pope Francis drew worldwide
attention after recently
visiting
the Philippines when he said
Catholics need not breed like
rabbits.
But the pontiff reiterated that
the only acceptable birth
control method is natural family
planning,
or NFP, where couples abstain
from sex on days when the woman
is fertile. Jason says
artificial methods are a
symbol of a moral decay.
REV. JOEL JASON: Why did we
invent contraceptives? Not
because NFP doesn't work, but
because
we do not want to say no. And
that is why we are actually
slowly losing our sense of
what sexuality
really is all about.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Back in the
maternity ward, Blessy Padua, a
laundry assistant who
did go to high school, says she
and her husband did try what she
calls the calendar method,
without success.
BLESSY PADUA, Philippines
(through translator): I am
Catholic, and I am aware the
Church
does not approve of family
planning, that God said go and
multiply. But at the same
time, I already have a lot of
kids. I had to stop getting
pregnant.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: After
delivering her seventh child,
34-year-old Padua opted to
be sterilized.
Obstetrician De La Paz says, for
many women here, especially
those younger and unmarried,
natural family planning is not a
good choice or a choice at all.
DR. SYLVIA DE LA PAZ: Yes, a
lot of them have challenges with
their partners, who have
issues with alcoholism, no job,
or inadequate income, so...
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: How many of
them are married, would you
guess?
DR. SYLVIA DE LA PAZ:
The majority not.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: One year
since implementation of the new
law began, she says most urban
women now have access to family
planning services. About a
third of Philippine women still
lack such access, most in rural
areas of this sprawling
archipelago.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam Lazaro in the
Philippines.
GWEN IFILL: Fred's reporting is
a partnership with the
Under-Told Stories Project at
Saint
Mary's University in Minnesota.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: the
medical doctor who was airlifted
from Liberia to the U.S.
one year ago this month after he
contracted Ebola while treating
patients in West Africa.
treated with the experimental
drug ZMapp at Emory University
Hospital in Atlanta. Both
eventually recovered.
Now Dr. Brantly and his wife,
Amber, have written a book about
the experience. He
recently sat down with Hari
Sreenivasan in our New York
studio.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, it's
almost exactly a year ago, after
you quarantined yourself.
You have got all the symptoms.
You have got the vomiting, the
diarrhea, the bloodshot
eyes, things that you have been
seeing in patients and treating.
And, for the most
part, those patients have been
dying. What's going through
your head?
DR. KENT BRANTLY, Ebola
Survivor: Before I received my
diagnosis, the main symptoms
I had were fever, fatigue,
body aches and diarrhea.
When the diarrhea started, that
was more mounting evidence that
this really is probably Ebola.
But I held on to that hope that
it was something else until we
had the definitive test result.
been a dozen, maybe 18 monkeys
had got it. What went through
your mind in making that
decision to say either yourself
or your colleague at the time
Nancy should take this?
DR. KENT BRANTLY: Nancy and I
actually talked on the phone. I
remember she called me and
said, after we had the kind of
informed consent discussion with
the doctor that was in charge
of our care, she said, "Kent,
what are you going to do?
Because I'll probably do
whatever
you do."
And I said, "I think I would
be willing to receive it."
But it was -- you know, I
thought, otherwise, I'm probably
going to otherwise, and this
may or may not help, but at
least I could be a guinea pig
and let the world know whether
there is any benefit
to it or not.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Once you get
this special air ambulance that
is arranged, the State
Department, lots of people
working to try to make this
happen, it's a bit cloak and
dagger. You're literally taken
to the airport at night.
There's -- before this, there
are countries that don't even
want you flying over their
airspace.
DR. KENT BRANTLY: It did seem
like something from a movie.
When I got out of that, what we
called an ambulance -- it was
the back of a pickup truck
-- and was being helped on to
the airplane, you know, I --
part of me really thought,
this is pretty cool. I'm being
evacuated on like this
top-secret jet. And I wanted
to look around and look at the
airplane, but it took every bit
of effort I had just to
put one foot in front of the
other to get on to that
airplane.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Let's talk a
little bit about your loved
ones. While you're in this
kind of medically necessary
quarantine, your wife and your
kids were almost in a socially
necessary quarantine of sorts.
DR. KENT BRANTLY: They left
Liberia three days before I got
sick. And once my diagnosis
was confirmed, they were put
in a quarantine of sorts.
They were monitored by the
Health Department, had to check
their temperature several times
a day, had to have two people
sign off on the temperatures
every day. But there was
a lot of fear surrounding that
whole situation in the general
public. And people weren't
sure what to make of a patient
with Ebola being brought back to
the United States, and
then the recognition that, oh,
there other people who have been
in that country who are
now walking around in public.
And I think that created a lot
of fear because of the unknown.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You also
mentioned that there were
certain cultural hurdles and
obstacles,
that some of that fear was also
happening in West Africa in a
totally different way.
Africa and here.
Here, everybody was afraid that,
we're all going to get Ebola,
we're all going to die.
In West Africa, the fear kind of
presented itself as denial that
Ebola was even real
or that a loved one who had all
the symptoms of Ebola, but it
must be something else.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What role do
you think your faith played in
all this?
DR. KENT BRANTLY: That's a hard
question for me to answer,
because I try not to
compartmentalize
my life into, this is my faith
life, this is my work life, this
is my family life.
My faith is an integral part of
who I am. It's part of the lens
through which I view
everything in life. So, I can't
separate this experience from my
faith.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Some people
are going to say, look, the
difference might not be
his faith. It's that he's an
American and he got literally
the best care on the planet
for this, vs. all the people who
don't get that, not just in
Liberia, but anywhere else.
I don't think there is anything
special about my faith that
saved my life. If anything,
my faith is what put me in a
position where I got Ebola. And
I'm really thankful to
the United States government, to
the government of Liberia, to
Emory University Hospital,
to Phoenix Air, to the State
Department, all of the people
that played a role in providing
me with the treatment
I received.
I don't say that, oh, it was my
faith that saved me, not those
people. I believe God
used those people to save my
life, not because of my great
faith. It just is. And so
I give God the credit for it.
But I thank all of those people,
and I -- I love them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Would
you do this again?
DR. KENT BRANTLY:
I would. I would.
That is what Amber and I feel
like. That's the kind of life
God has called us to. And
in some ways, we're really eager
to get back to that, to get out
of a life where we're
doing book tours and stuff and
get back to the life of service
that we feel called to.
The book is called
"Called for Life."
Thanks so much for joining us.
DR. KENT BRANTLY:
Thank you, Hari.
GWEN IFILL: We will be back
with a conversation about how to
talk to your children about
religion.
to ask for your support. And
that support helps keep programs
like ours on the air.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now the latest
addition to the "NewsHour"
Bookshelf.
Raising children is a journey
generously sprinkled with what
many view as teachable moments,
perhaps none as challenging as
those surrounding faith and
religion.
Author, journalist and
"NewsHour" online parenting
columnist Wendy Thomas Russell
comes at this
from a different angle in her
new book, "Relax, It's Just God:
How and Why to Talk to Your
Kids About Religion When
You're Not Religious."
She recently talked with Jeffrey
Brown and explained how the book
came to be.
WENDY THOMAS RUSSELL, Author,
"Relax, It's Just God: How and
Why to Talk to Your Kids
About Religion When You're Not
Religious": I was in the car,
and my daughter announced
to me that God had made her and
that God had, in fact, made all
children and all people.
And...
JEFFREY BROWN: And you thought?
WENDY THOMAS RUSSELL: And I was
so -- you know, she was so
incredulous because she just
thought, this seems like really
big news, and how you don't know
it, mommy, is really
beyond me.
So -- but it did. It struck me.
I was really caught off guard by
it. And it...
JEFFREY BROWN: And what
did you say to her?
WENDY THOMAS RUSSELL: I didn't
say much at the time. I sort of
stumbled through
the conversation, oh, who is
God? And I sort of stumbled
through the conversation,
and then later went home
and talked to my husband.
And he said, you know, it's not
what Maxine believes, but what
she does in life that matters.
And it was a turning point for
me, this idea that, if we raise
kids to be moral and
ethical and kind and generous,
then what they believe is
secondary. And it was -- it's
been a guiding
force to the book.
JEFFREY BROWN: I want to ask
you about the title. For so
many people, God and their
religion are a basic component
of who they are. It's not just
God.
WENDY THOMAS RUSSELL: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: And yet you use
that, just God, relax, it's just
God.
WENDY THOMAS RUSSELL: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN:
What do you mean?
WENDY THOMAS RUSSELL: I don't
mean to be flippant or
insensitive in any way, but it
does seem like there are certain
topics that are hard for parents
to talk about and to
broach with their children.
And, increasingly, religion is
becoming a one of them, and in a
lot of secular families,
the word God is almost replacing
sex as kind of this taboo
subject. So...
JEFFREY BROWN: The hard
discussion that parents might
have.
WENDY THOMAS RUSSELL:
Exactly. Yes.
What I was getting at was that
it's not such a difficult
subject if you approach it in
the right way. And so we
can all sort of lighten up.
JEFFREY BROWN: You are coming
at this as a secular,
nonreligious parent.
WENDY THOMAS RUSSELL: Correct.
JEFFREY BROWN: You see a
growing need for this kind of
discussion.
WENDY THOMAS RUSSELL: I do.
Religion isn't going anywhere.
Religion is going to be around
for a very long time.
But it's true that secularism is
on the rise. And it's growing
rapidly. And it's
grown in the last 20 years. The
problem with a lot of parents in
this particular group
is that they are trying to raise
their kids in this era of
transition or this era of
change.
So let's come up with a way that
we can talk to our kids about
religion that's completely
honest, that values critical
thinking, that values religious
tolerance and literacy, and
that kind of leaves the door for
kids to really make up their own
minds.
JEFFREY BROWN: Give me an
example of a common dilemma that
parents find when it comes to
raising their children
vis-a-vis religion.
WENDY THOMAS RUSSELL:
There are quite a few.
And I did a survey of 1,000
nonreligious parents to find out
exactly that. And the top
reason
cited was, people weren't sure
how to talk about religion
without indoctrinating their
kids into what they believed
themselves. That was a hard
line.
The other one was interacting
with religious family members
and keeping the peace in
families.
When you're raising a child who
is in a secular household, how
do you bridge the gap
between the older generations
who may be more rigidly
religious?
JEFFREY BROWN: This word
indoctrinating is an important
one, because it comes up time
and time again here. What's the
difference between
indoctrinating and guiding
children,
right?
WENDY THOMAS RUSSELL: Right.
Indoctrination, I see, as almost
the antithesis of critical
thinking. Of course it's fine
to guide your children, but I
see indoctrination as sort of
this middle ground between
full-on
brainwashing and guidance. it's
stronger than -- it's stronger
than just merely guidance.
I see indoctrination as telling
children that there is only one
way to believe, and that
all other ways and people who
believe all other things are
less worthy of our respect,
less intelligent, less moral.
It's that -- that's the crucial
issue, because I think
that, when you do that, you set
up your child to be bigoted
against those who don't believe
the way that you do. You know,
we are -- it's not a
black-and-white world.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so give me
an example of the most basic
question of -- your child
says, mommy, does God exist and
what is God or who is God?
WENDY THOMAS RUSSELL: The way
that I go about it is to say,
that's a great question,
and I'm glad you're thinking
about it, that there are a lot
of different ways that people
describe God and
describe what God is.
And this is what some people
believe, and this is what other
people believe. And this
is -- and I don't believe in
God, but that's OK. It's all
OK. And you get to make up
your own mind about
what to believe.
JEFFREY BROWN: Isn't that kind
of mushy? Isn't it the job of a
parent to guide -- I
will use the word guide again --
their child to say, well, no,
it's not just this, it could
be this, it could be that,
whatever you think, whatever
goes?
WENDY THOMAS RUSSELL: Right.
Well, I think within reason.
And I do -- I see a difference
between guiding your child
to be a moral person, an ethical
person, a self-respecting
person, a critical thinker.
Those are all really
important things.
Guiding them to believe in a
certain way, in a certain God or
a certain prophet, that
is not so important. I really
want to focus on what people do
in life and not what they
believe, because if we can
judge people on their actions,
and not what we think the
reasons behind their actions
are, it makes for a more
tolerant world and a better
world.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right.
The book is "Relax,
It's Just God."
Wendy Thomas Russell,
thank you so much.
WENDY THOMAS RUSSELL:
Thank you, Jeff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online right now: It's the
season of superhero
blockbusters.
But is there any chance of
turning superhero fantasy into
biological reality? We examine
the odds of developing
superpowers. All that and more
is on
our Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday, we profile an
all-female unit tracking
poachers in South Africa.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and
again right here tomorrow
evening. For all
of
us at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.